Title : Formal Verification of systems with unbounded agents
Abstract of the talk :
The complexity and size of software has increased with time.  And with it,
the necessity to provide mathematical guarantees of its correctness.

Empirical studies show that, the sooner the errors are identified and rectified
in the software development life cycle, the lesser are the error costs. If there
are errors in the design of the software, they propagate to the implementation
stage where they become tedious to resolve.
Being able to verify the specifications of these systems in the design stage of
the software development (such as using bounded model checking) is an important
activity that can be done using formal techniques. The characteristics of the
software play a role in the choice of the formal technique to verify a software.
 
Client server systems are one of the largest programming paradigms. Crypto exchanges
with an unbounded number of investors, multiplayer games where the number of players
are not known apriori and services with an unbounded customer base are instances of
unbounded client server systems.
We focus on client server systems with a single server and unboundedly many clients,
where the number of clients is not known a priori. A major challenge is to identify
the suitable model to abstract the behaviour of the systems. The second challenge is
to identify suitable logics to specify the properties. The third challenge is to
identify suitable formal techniques and to verify the properties on the model.

First, we discuss how we model unbounded client-server systems as unbounded Petri nets
and their temporal properties are expressed in Linear Temporal Logic (LTL) with
integer arithmetic. The system evolves in two dimensions namely, the number of
clients and number of execution steps. Hence, we propose a technique for exploiting
these two dimensions, called two dimensional bounded model checking (2D-BMC),
where we utilize SMT solvers.

Third, we look at the scenario where clients have their own internal structure and we
model them as a Petri net which is interacting with the server Petri net and there
can be an unbounded number of such client Petri nets. This is a type of higher order
Petri nets, which allow nesting of Petri nets called Elementary Object Systems (EOS).  
We specify the temporal properties on EOSs and implement a prototype to verify them.
We also explore the possibility of losing information in the EOS at various nesting
levels and their effects on the reachability and coverability problems and chart their
decidability status. This gives us a suite of formal verification tools for client
server systems with unbounded clients using various concurrent models and using various
suitable logics to represent their properties.
